ResourceLib/BelowGround/Individual/FixedSalinity/FixedSalinity.md, before:

Below-ground module defining porewater salinity as  
(i) constant,  
(ii) a gradient, or   
(iii) a time series.

For a time series of salinity, you must create a csv input file (with semicolon as the separator) with 3 columns, 
defining a time step (in seconds) and salinity (in kg/kg) on the left (i.e. at min_x) and right (i.e. at max_x) 
boundary at that time step. For intermediate time steps with no defined salinity, values will be linearly interpolated.
*Note:* the first row of the input file will be skipped and should be used for headers.  

No feedback between plant water uptake and porewater salinity.  
No competition. Recommended for species parametrisation.

Salinity below a tree is calculated using the following formula:  

```python
salinity_tree = ((x_tree - min_x) / (max_x - min_x) * (salinity_max - salinity_min) + salinity_min)
```

Attributes:
    type (string): "FixedSalinity"
    min_x (float): x-coordinate of the left border (y-axis)
    max_x (float): x-coordinate of the right border (y-axis)
    salinity (float float or string): either two values representing the salinity (kg/kg) range 
        from min_x (first value) to max_x (second value) <strong>or</strong> the path to a csv file containing a time series of salinity (see description above and 
        example below)
    variant (string): (optional) Variant to calculate salinity reduction factor. Default is "bettina". See Notes for more information.
    sine (nesting-tag): (optional) Calculate salinity for each time step based on a sine function. See notes for details.
    amplitude (float): parameter defining the amplitude of the sine function
    stretch_h (float): parameter defining the horizontal stretch of the sine function. Default: 58
    deviation (float): parameter defining the standard deviation to pick salinity value from sine function. Default: 0

**Notes:**

*Variant*
- Calculate salinity reduction factor  
    - "bettina" (default): ratio of zero-salinity and actual water potential. Zero-salinity water potential based on water potential difference between leaf (minimum leaf water potential) and porewater (osmotic potential).
    - "forman": sigmoidal salinity stress factor based on FORMAN model by Chen and Twilley (1998)

*Sine*
- Calculate salinity ($sal_{xi}$) on the left and right model domain using a sine function
  - $x_{i} = amplitude * sin(\frac{time}{stetch_h} + stetch_v)$
- The vertical stretch ($stetch_v$) of the function is defined by values defined in \<salinity>
- Apply noise by drawing a random number from the normal distribution with $x_{i}$ as mean
  - $sal_{xi} = random.normal(size=1, loc=x_i, scale=deviation)$


Examples:
    
Option (i): constant salinity of 35 ppt across the model domain
```xml
<belowground>
    <type> FixedSalinity </type>
    <min_x>0</min_x>
    <max_x>22</max_x>
    <salinity>0.035 0.035</salinity>
</belowground>
```

Option (ii): increasing gradient of salinity from 25 to 35 ppt (left to right border)
```xml
<salinity> 0.025 0.035 </salinity>
```

Option (iii): time series of salinity 
```xml
<salinity> test/SmallTests/inputFiles/salinity_A.csv </salinity>
```

Example csv file:
```json
t_step;salinity_1;salinity_2
0;0.010;0.020
1000000;0.011;0.021
2000000;0.012;0.022    
```

Example sine function:
```xml
<sine>
    <amplitude>15</amplitude>
    <stretch_h>58</stretch_h>
    <deviation>0</deviation>
</sine>
```

Commit message:

[RL] add links to sensitivity repo

ResourceLib/BelowGround/Individual/FixedSalinity/FixedSalinity.md, after:

Below-ground module defining porewater salinity as  
(i) constant,  
(ii) a gradient, or   
(iii) a time series.

For a time series of salinity, you must create a csv input file (with semicolon as the separator) with 3 columns, 
defining a time step (in seconds) and salinity (in kg/kg) on the left (i.e. at min_x) and right (i.e. at max_x) 
boundary at that time step. For intermediate time steps with no defined salinity, values will be linearly interpolated.
*Note:* the first row of the input file will be skipped and should be used for headers.  

No feedback between plant water uptake and porewater salinity.  
No competition. Recommended for species parametrisation.

Salinity below a tree is calculated using the following formula:  

```python
salinity_tree = ((x_tree - min_x) / (max_x - min_x) * (salinity_max - salinity_min) + salinity_min)
```

Attributes:
    type (string): "FixedSalinity"
    min_x (float): x-coordinate of the left border (y-axis)
    max_x (float): x-coordinate of the right border (y-axis)
    salinity (float float or string): either two values representing the salinity (kg/kg) range 
        from min_x (first value) to max_x (second value) <strong>or</strong> the path to a csv file containing a time series of salinity (see description above and 
        example below)
    variant (string): (optional) Variant to calculate salinity reduction factor. Default is "bettina". See Notes for more information.
    sine (nesting-tag): (optional) Calculate salinity for each time step based on a sine function. See notes for details.
    amplitude (float): parameter defining the amplitude of the sine function
    stretch_h (float): parameter defining the horizontal stretch of the sine function. Default: 58
    deviation (float): parameter defining the standard deviation to pick salinity value from sine function. Default: 0

**Notes:**

*Variant*
- Calculate salinity reduction factor  
    - "bettina" (default): ratio of zero-salinity and actual water potential. Zero-salinity water potential based on water potential difference between leaf (minimum leaf water potential) and porewater (osmotic potential).
    - "forman": sigmoidal salinity stress factor based on FORMAN model by Chen and Twilley (1998). See pyMANGA sensitivity repository for [details](https://github.com/pymanga/sensitivity/blob/main/ResourceLib/BelowGround/Individual/FixedSalinity/forman.md).

*Sine*
- Calculate salinity ($sal_{xi}$) on the left and right model domain using a sine function
  - $x_{i} = amplitude * sin(\frac{time}{stetch_h} + stetch_v)$
- The vertical stretch ($stetch_v$) of the function is defined by values defined in \<salinity>
- Apply noise by drawing a random number from the normal distribution with $x_{i}$ as mean
  - $sal_{xi} = random.normal(size=1, loc=x_i, scale=deviation)$
- See pyMANGA sensitivity repository for [details](https://github.com/pymanga/sensitivity/blob/main/ResourceLib/BelowGround/Individual/FixedSalinity/sine.md)

Examples:
    
Option (i): constant salinity of 35 ppt across the model domain
```xml
<belowground>
    <type> FixedSalinity </type>
    <min_x>0</min_x>
    <max_x>22</max_x>
    <salinity>0.035 0.035</salinity>
</belowground>
```

Option (ii): increasing gradient of salinity from 25 to 35 ppt (left to right border)
```xml
<salinity> 0.025 0.035 </salinity>
```

Option (iii): time series of salinity 
```xml
<salinity> test/SmallTests/inputFiles/salinity_A.csv </salinity>
```

Example csv file:
```json
t_step;salinity_1;salinity_2
0;0.010;0.020
1000000;0.011;0.021
2000000;0.012;0.022    
```

Example sine function:
```xml
<sine>
    <amplitude>15</amplitude>
    <stretch_h>58</stretch_h>
    <deviation>0</deviation>
</sine>
```
